Title: Concert Etiquette
Date: 2013-02-19 03:00
Author: Just Alfred
Tags: The Classical-Kwontum Interface, Music

*Originally published at: [http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2013/02/None.html](http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2013/02/None.html)*

The concert hall is a unique place. I can think of no other place in
which the attention of so many people is so singularly focused. Be it
the opera, ballet, symphony, or chamber recital, the attention points to
the stage. And because the rests, the silence, in music is as important
as the notes (just ask [John
Cage](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/4%E2%80%B233%E2%80%B3)), that
attention remains unbroken through the performance. This leads to what
may seem a stifling atmosphere to many -- full of obscure and antiquated
rules and traditions. In actuality, there is only one rule, and it
exists for good reason. That rule is: do not disturb.  
<a name="more"></a>  
This is a familiar rule. It is the reason we turn off our cell phones
and keep our feet down at the movies. It only seems so uptight in the
concert hall because nothing is amplified. Popcorn chomps are easily
obscured in a theater with THX-certified surround sound. Any sort of
noise, be it shuffling your feet or un-sticking your sweaty hand from
your program, distracts fellow patrons from that which they paid and
came to experience.  
  
Indeed that raw, unfiltered connection to the stage is partly what makes
it so exciting. In this hyper-connected, perpetually moving, modern age,
how rare and precious it is to join hundreds or thousands of others in
sharing an experience of human expression! Is it not for this reason we
attend sports games and attend concerts of other genres? Yet, as with so
many treasures, this one is fragile. Any small sound could obscure a
delicate touch of phrasing that separates the pleasant from the
sublime.  
  
These sudden distractions are like scratches on your favorite cd. And as
with cds, they are unfortunately unavoidable. I am very forgiving with
drops, coughs, and gasps (when elicited by an occurrence on the stage)
because these are involuntary. After all, most of the audience tends to
be elderly, no? It is the shuffling, cell phone glare, and whispering
that is so very distracting. I have heard announcements on more than one
occasion suggesting, "if you would like to enjoy a candy or cough drop
during the performance, please open it now." We are serious about the
music.  
  
There is one rule that I will confess is unnecessary. During
multi-movement works such as concertos and symphonies, we are to hold
our applause until after the final movement. I honor this, but I do not
begrudge those who do not. In my opinion, if the audience's
concentration really must not be broken between two movements, then it
is up to the conductor to maintain engagement. That is accomplished as
easily as by not dropping his hands. As for the performers'
concentration, they are professionals.  
  
So in the end, that is all. Do not make noises, do not move excessively,
do not check your phone, do not wear strong fragrances, do not wear an
enormous hat. Do not whisper until the lights come up. This one is hard
for people, for some reason. But really, just do your best not to
disturb your neighbors, and enjoy what unfolds on the stage.  
  
As a final note, I have started my exploration into the data set
mentioned in the last post. It may take me some time to execute my plans
as I am still a novice programmer, but here is a peek without
explanation at what I have found so far. I have accepted the assistance
of a good friend with a doctorate in CS (AI) so I hope that we will have
something fun for you soon!  

<figure>
  <a href="{filename}../images/tritone.png">
    <img src="{filename}../images/tritone.png" alt="Plot titled, 'Tritone Probability by Decade'">
  </a>
</figure>
