Title: Quicklink 2
Date: 2011-01-17 04:18
Author: Just Alfred
Tags: The Classical-Kwontum Interface, Music

*Originally published at: [http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2011/01/None.html](http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2011/01/None.html)*

I haven't given you a real post since before Christmas, and all I have
to offer today is a couple of fun links.  My apologies.  I'm working on
a couple of posts, but they're taking more research to complete than I
expected.  I haven't been feeling particularly inspired to write about
simpler topics.  See, I have this other writing project that has to take
priority for some reason....  
  
So today,
[here](http://www.npr.org/blogs/deceptivecadence/2011/01/14/132930151/the-classical-interrogation-room?ft=1&f=129702125)
is a cartoon that proves I'm not alone in a sentiment to which I've
twice referred before.  
  
Second is a lovely [video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6k705AhOzKc)
of the winner of an online competition for young musicians.  She'll get
to perform in Carnegie Hall and feature in NPR's "From The Top" program
which features pre-collegiate musicians from around the country.  I
share this in part because of a joke I recently heard: What do you call
a person who hangs around musicians?  A percussionist.  That's what's so
great about this.  How often does anyone, let alone a kid, get to
demonstrate this level of proficiency in a percussion instrument?  How
many professional female percussionists do you ever see in orchestras or
as soloists?  (I can only think of Evelyn Glennie who also happens to be
deaf.)  And how often does anyone look at a percussionist alongside a
slew of violinists, pianists, cellists, etc. and decide that the
percussionist is more talented?  Brava!  
  
Keep this young lady in mind as we'll be considering her in my next
post.  I'll try to get it up in the next week or two.  But really, I
need to be making better progress on my other endeavor....

