Title: A Little Night-Food Music
Date: 2013-03-12 01:23
Author: Just Alfred
Tags: music
Slug: a-little-night-food-music

*Originally published at: [http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2013/03/a-little-night-food-music.html](http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2013/03/a-little-night-food-music.html)*

For the unaware, the title is a reference to Mozart's [Eine Kleine
Nachtmusik](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eine_kleine_Nachtmusik).
Everyone knows the tune. Also for the unaware, "night-food" refers to
the food you eat at dinner. So you see, the title is clever and not at
all contrived because this post is about music to go along with dinner.  
<a name="more"></a>  
  
I recently hosted a dinner party and made some Korean food for the
occasion. The menu included ddukbokki as an appetizer which I dubbed,
"evil rice sticks". They can be a challenge in their spiciness. The main
course included oxtail soup. I had fruit and sweet potatoes ready for
dessert, though my guests graciously brought more decadent treats.  
  
Picking music for the appetizer was no problem. I chose a bit of
Paganini, Tartini's "Devil's Trill Sonata", and Liszt's "Mephisto
Waltz". Choosing music to match the soup was a bit more challenging. I
thought of Bydlo from Mussorgsky's "Pictures at an Exhibition", but that
fills less than 4 minutes. I considered adding some Soviet music
signifying the proud march of the working ox, but felt that could be a
bit heavy. I decided to play the entire suite and put on lighter fare
for after-dinner conversation. (It turns out my taste in music leans
dark, so my choices may not have been all that light.)  
  
I realized later that I neglected the tune once synonymous with the
consumption of hot, bovine flesh.
[Hoedown](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LsReWx9XdNs) from Copland's
Rodeo. Predictably, my palm darted towards my forehead at moderate
velocity upon that realization.  
  
I did not bother to try coming up with matches for fruit and sweet
potatoes, though I suppose I could have. "Dance of the Sugar Plum Fairy"
would almost be appropriate, except for the unfortunate sentience of
that character. Perhaps there is a harvest song I could have played.  
  
What would have gone on your playlist? Am I missing other songs about
cows or oxen? Are there any classical tunes about sweet potatoes?
Working the other direction, are there songs that you feel make a
natural fit for a particular meal? e.g. Schubert's "Trout" quintet. Or
maybe Swan Lake if anyone ate swan.

