Title: Amazing Engineering - Episode 1
Date: 2013-03-31 20:42
Author: Just Alfred
Tags: explaining, science
Slug: amazing-engineering-episode-1

*Originally published at: [http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2013/03/amazing-engineering-episode-1.html](http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2013/03/amazing-engineering-episode-1.html)*

As an experimental physicist, I spent more time engineering than doing
science. As a result, I've come to greatly appreciate sophisticated or
clever works of engineering. Sometimes you read about accomplishments
that don't seem possible. I'm starting a series on these sorts of
feats.  
<a name="more"></a>  
For the first episode, I'd like to start with something I first learned
about as an undergrad. See if you can guess what this is:  
  
<figure>
  <a href="http://d1jqu7g1y74ds1.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/2010/08/sunspot.jpg">
    <img src="http://d1jqu7g1y74ds1.cloudfront.net/wp-content/uploads/2010/08/sunspot.jpg" alt="yellow-orange, flecked surface collapsing into a dark hole in the center">
  </a>
</figure>
  
If you guessed "sea creature's eye", you would be wrong. If you guessed
anything biological, you would be wrong. It's actually an extremely
high-resolution image of a sunspot. (By the way, the image was taken
from
[this](http://www.universetoday.com/71971/amazing-sunspot-image-from-new-solar-telescope/)
article) Here's what's unique:  
  
Astronomical observations almost always involve focusing light of some
sort onto a sensor. But after traveling all the way here in a
more-or-less straight line through mostly nothing, light from the stars
has to pass through our atmosphere. X-rays get scattered like light in a
dusty room, while visible and infrared light get jumbled up from
atmospheric turbulence. Look above a hot car in the summer to see a
strong example of this.  
  
One way to make up for that is to stick your telescope in space, Ã  la
Hubble.  
  
The other, more radical way is to correct for the jumbling. That's
right. Make a shape-shifting mirror that changes fast and accurately
enough to compensate for the atmosphere's messiness, and do it with
enough resolution to matter. It's the optical equivalent of
noise-canceling headphones. And it's significantly harder. Also, much
more precise. It's called Adaptive Optics. And, remarkably, it's been in
use since the late 90s.  
  
The technique involves using a point source in the sky, like a star, as
a reference. The active mirror element continuously changes so as to get
as tight an image of this reference as possible. This improves the
angular resolution of a telescope by a factor of about twenty or so.
Which means what used to be one blob can be resolved into a few hundred
smaller blobs, if they were ever arranged like that.  
  
If there is no star that's bright enough to use, then you can make one.
Lasers are used to illuminate a spot higher up in the atmosphere to use
for reference. Artificial stars!  
  
If you want to look at the sun, though, things are harder for three
reasons. First, heating of the air at ground level worsens the jumbling.
Second, visible light is more susceptible to atmospheric turbulence than
the infrared light that's often more interesting for night-time
observations. Third, there's no point-like reference star to use, and
it's too bright out to make one.  
  
So that image above captures quite a lot of engineering magic. It seems
like a given that we'd have clear images of our closest star, but it
takes something as crazy as adaptive optics to actually achieve it. Oh,
and by the way, this technology has led directly to medical applications
(like improved laser eye surgery), so it's another case of pure science
leading to unexpected benefits elsewhere in society.

</p>

