Title: Austin-auto
Date: 2010-12-13 03:51
Author: Just Alfred
Tags: The Classical-Kwontum Interface, Music

*Originally published at: [http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2010/12/None.html](http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2010/12/None.html)*

A kind friend forgave my ignorance of popular and indie music since I
know a fair deal about classical music. This, she deemed, was an
elevated sort of knowledge. The compliment was appreciated, but I can't
logically justify it to myself. Knowledge of classical music is just as
useless in everyday life as baseball stats or celebrity gossip. Perhaps
more useless since people rarely ever know what I'm talking about. Also,
I can't say that my focus is any more intense during a performance than
a football fan's is during a game, though perhaps my memory is more
actively engaged. I can't see how naming members of any of the world's
orchestras (which I can't do) is any more valuable than naming players
on sports teams. My performance abilities are no more keen for my
interest than the Guitar Hero addict or the guy who plays pickup
basketball on weekends. You're probably just as able to pick out a song
appropriate to a mood or situation from popular music as I am from
classical.  
  
As another example, I complain that so many popular songs are little
more than looped tracks with maybe some key changes and vocals on top.
Well, guess what? That's existed in classical music for centuries. A
phrase that's repeated over and over like that is called a <span
style="font-style: italic;">ground bass</span> or an <span
style="font-style: italic;">ostinato</span>. You know [Pachelbel's
canon](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6wpPk8qk3uQ), right? A lot of
string players <span style="font-size: 78%;">(pretend they)</span> hate
playing it because it's the [same GD
thing](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JdxkVQy7QLM) over and over again.
Ravel's Bolero is another example that uses an ostinato which I won't
link because I hate it that much. The use of ostinati went out of
fashion for a century and a half but came back for different purposes.
And while not technically an ostinato, listen to the different repeated
figurations in the left hand of this [Mozart
sonata](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qnz91LnGSD4). (Who can name what
the low-high-middle-high bass pattern that starts the piece is called?)
Or in the right hand of this [Beethoven
sonata](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O6txOvK-mAk). So I can't say I'm
above repetitive music either.  
  
Granted, most of what gets played is not heavy on ostinati the way jazz
or rap music is. But there are other sorts of repetition. A song in
<span style="font-style: italic;">strophic</span> form repeats a theme
with each stanza. <span style="font-style: italic;">Fugues</span>
consist of several statements of a main <span
style="font-style: italic;">subject</span> sometimes with <span
style="font-style: italic;">episodes</span> between each statement.
<span style="font-style: italic;">Rondo</span> or <span
style="font-style: italic;">ritornello</span> form similarly repeats a
statement of a main theme between other themes. Even the grand <span
style="font-style: italic;">sonata-allegro</span> form involves a total
of three statements of the first, second, and closing themes along with
any variations in the development and coda.  
  
In some respects, repetition serves to lighten the burden on the
composer to write new material. But it also offers a chance for
brilliant development of ideas. For a very fundamental example, take
[Beethoven's](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N6K_IuBsRM4)
[Symphony](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ijiHzheK4GQ) [no.
5](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Mt7NIPFgQk) in [C
minor](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-mZ4_aWfH7s). (All four movements
there for ya.) It opens with the most famous four notes in the world.
And that simple rhythmic motive, short-short-short-long, is used in a
thousand variations of mood, melodic <span
style="font-style: italic;">contour</span>, <span
style="font-style: italic;">key</span>, <span
style="font-style: italic;">texture</span>, and so on throughout the
entirety of the work. Repetition that's not repetitive. Certainly there
are artists today who accomplish this as well, but they tend not to be
as popular. I have a theory about that, but that's another post.  
  
So maybe that's one aspect to classical music that earns it the epithet
of 'elevated'. Quite often, you have to really be paying attention to
even notice when it's being repetitive. And isn't it a joy to be paying
attention? You can walk past the Mona Lisa and think it's just a
painting of an odd-looking woman. Or you can understand the history,
details, and genius behind and in that masterpiece and feel honored for
the experience.

