Title: Christmas post
Date: 2010-12-25 14:50
Author: Just Alfred
Tags: The Classical-Kwontum Interface, Music

*Originally published at: [http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2010/12/None.html](http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2010/12/None.html)*

It's Christmas, I'm on vacation, so here's a short post for you to
enjoy.  

<a name="more"></a>First, I want to point out a couple articles that
tickled my fancy.  The first is a story about a flash-mob [gone
wrong](http://www.mercurynews.com/top-stories/ci_16912758?nclick_check=1). 
In Sacramento, a flash mob was arranged to sing Handel's Halleluiah
Chorus ([best rendition
ever](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZCFCeJTEzNU)).  The organizing
group made arrangements with the mall and made sheet music available
online for people to study.  But so many people showed up that the floor
started to shake.  Some likened it to an earthquake.  They had to
evacuate the mall.  Handel would be proud.  
  
The second is an article from the somewhat new classical music blog on
NPR, [Deceptive Cadence](http://www.npr.org/blogs/deceptivecadence/).  I
get a lot of inspiration and material for this blog from here.  [This
article](http://www.npr.org/blogs/deceptivecadence/2010/12/14/132035046/least-favorite-christmas-song?ft=1&f=129702125)
is a fun little conversation about least favorite Christmas songs.  I
have to agree with Tom.  I never could stand *Little Drummer Boy* and
I've already mentioned how much I hate Ravel's *Bolero*.  I love how he
compares the two.  What are your least favorite/most hated Christmas
songs?  I've always wondered if music majors get irritated with how
*Deck the Halls* butchers the *solfege* (fa la la la la la la la la
should be re mi fa re mi re do ti do, right?)  And while it's true I
don't ever want to see *The Nutcracker* ballet, I do enjoy the music. 
There's just something grotesque to me about the costumes and the
dancing and the phantasmagoria....  Leave me alone, it creeps me out. 
But share what songs you hate this season.  Or at least what songs
you're happy you won't have to hear for another year after today.  
  
It's been a good year, overall.  Thanks, my friends, for reading and
taking an interest in my interest.  Have a Merry Christmas and happy New
Year!  Or if you don't celebrate Christmas, at least enjoy the fact that
you're getting at least a day or two off of work.

