Title: Guido
Date: 2013-11-16 20:12
Author: Just Alfred
Tags: The Classical-Kwontum Interface, Music
Slug: guido

*Originally published at: [http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2013/11/guido.html](http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2013/11/guido.html)*

Let me tell you about a great guy named Guido. He invented a language
that greatly lowered the barrier for new students to enter into his art.
It was very difficult to learn a script in the old languages either
because the syntax was so arcane or because you really needed someone to
fill in missing details every time. Guido's language was intuitive and
readable, and it made it possible to reproduce results with minimal
training. And now, around a millennium later, it's hard to imagine music
without the ubiquitous staff that Guido d'Arezzo first invented.  
  
<a name="more"></a>[Guido](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guido_of_Arezzo)
was really interested in teaching. Prior to his staff notation, there
wasn't a great way to indicate the pitch of a note. There were notations
to indicate whether to go up or down by a lot or a little, but it wasn't
particularly precise. He also invented mnemonics to help students learn.
There's something called the Guidonian hand by which a student could use
his knuckles to help remember his system. And of course, there's
[solfège](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Solf%C3%A8ge).  

"*Do*. A deer..." That whole *do-re-mi* business is solfège. It makes my
head hurt. *Do* isn't a C or an A or any specific note. It's the base
note of whatever key the song is in. A step up from there is *re*, a
step up from there is *mi*, a half-step up from there is *fa*, and so
on. If the key is C-major, *do-re-mi-fa* is CDEF. If it's D-major, it's
DEF\#G.

It gets worse. In a minor scale, *do-re-mi-fa-sol-la-ti-do* becomes
*do-re-**me**-fa-sol-**le**-**te**-do*. In order to read a line and get
the solfège right, one has to keep track of the particular key and mode.
These often change in the middle of a piece. People who can sing solfège
in real time freak me out.  
  
I've been asking professional musicians when I get the chance what
importance solfège had in their musical training. I'm still struggling
to understand since no one seems to actually use it. My current
suspicion is that it's a useful framework for illuminating music theory
and the relations between notes. After all, a c-sharp and d-flat are not
the same note, despite what a piano or guitar would have you believe.
Solfège lays this fact bare along with other concepts. (I would love to
chat with someone who teaches this stuff. hint hint)

Anyway, we can thank Guido for the names, *do-re-mi-fa*.... Actually, he
called it *ut-re-mi*..., but it all started with him. He took the names
from the hymn, *Ut queant laxis*, because each of the first six
half-lines started with a different note. The starting syllables were
assigned to those notes. Convenient. Thanks, Guido.

Also, [Guido van Rossum](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guido_van_Rossum)
(inventor of the python programming language) is pretty cool, too.

