Title: Hypotheses Part 2
Date: 2013-08-21 14:08
Author: Just Alfred
Tags: exploring, science
Slug: hypotheses-part-2

*Originally published at: [http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2013/08/hypotheses-part-2.html](http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2013/08/hypotheses-part-2.html)*

Fancy bars these days like to serve their cocktails with a single big
chunk of ice. Less surface area means slower cooling means less dilution
of your expensive elixir over time. I don't buy it.  
  
<a name="more"></a>Here's my reasoning. Ice serves two purposes in
cocktails. First is to chill liquids, second is to keep those liquids
cold. Let's consider these in turn.  
  
At what temperature is ice? Zero degrees Celsius, right? Sometimes. Your
freezer is actually quite a bit colder, so fresh ice from the freezer is
just as cold. Pick up an ice cube with a damp hand, and it will freeze
the water on your fingers and stick. It's not very pleasant. But do it
anyway. For science. Ice sitting in a bucket for a while will be pretty
close to zero. You'll know it if the ice is wet.  
  
Let's ignore melting for a moment. We can talk about whiskey stones if
you prefer. Once you drop a cold stone in a room-temperature liquid, the
two will equilibrate in temperature. The liquid chills, and the stone
warms. But the stone doesn't warm uniformly. The outside warms up first
and passes this heat inwards. This means the inside of a whiskey stone
or block of ice can be substantially colder than the outside. Every bit
of cooling of the liquid has to come from the stone/ice, so with a
single large chunk, it takes longer to get to the cooling power of the
center, meaning it takes longer to cool the liquid.  
  
Let's talk about wet ice, so that the whole chunk is at zero or so. Now
all cooling of the liquid results in melting of the ice. Heat from the
liquid causes the ice to transition into a liquid state until the two
reach thermal equilibrium. But for a given volume and initial
temperature of liquid that you're chilling, the exact same amount of ice
will melt regardless of its shape. So again, less surface area means the
liquid takes longer to chill.  
  
Put these two effects together, and using one large chunk of ice will
leave more cooling power locked in the center of the ice, and more of
the chilling will have to come from melting rather than simple heat
exchange. Result: bigger ice cube = slightly more dilution.  
  
How about keeping a drink cold? Now the liquid is presumably at the same
temperature as your ice already. Also presumably, you're a distinguished
imbiber and sip your drink slowly. We can ignore simple heat exchange
between ice and liquid here since that will occur quickly compared to
the lifetime of your drink. Now, let's compare a glass filled with
crushed ice vs. one big chunk. As the heat enters your glass, it
eventually makes its way to your ice and melts it. Equal amounts of heat
means equal amounts of melting. However, with one big chunk, your drink
can get a little warmer in regions further from the ice. Since the
volume of liquid that needs cooling becomes effectively smaller, less
ice has to melt. Score.  
  
On the other hand, if most of your ice is sitting above the surface of
your drink it's chilling not only the liquid, but also the air. Most of
your scotch's lifetime will be in this state. Yes, even if the ice were
not sticking shamelessly out, the liquid would be chilling the air, and
end up melting the ice anyway. But it would also have less surface area
and sit lower in the glass resulting in more insulation from warmer
air.  
  
These are two small, competing effects, and it's not clear without
experiment which wins. My guess is that a big, but not huge ice cube is
better here. In part because most people won't care much about the
difference between a drink at 0C and 3C.  
  
My recommendation: always chill drinks with small ice cubes fresh from
the freezer if possible. For serving, ice cubes from a standard ice cube
tray are probably big enough. Bigger than that, and you're just showing
off. If you really hate dilution, get whiskey stones and/or
double-walled glasses. If your glass has a stem, use it so you're not
pumping heat from your hands into your drink. If I've left something out
of my analysis, please let me know!

