Title: Introduction, first loves
Date: 2010-11-28 06:30
Author: Just Alfred
Tags: living, music

*Originally published at: [http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2010/11/None.html](http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2010/11/None.html)*

Welcome to my new classical music blog. As you probably know, I'm
approaching the end of my PhD work in condensed matter physics. In the
time I've been here I've found myself more and more enamored with the
world of classical music, by which I mean Western art music. Bravo if
you know why the former term is somewhat ambiguous. Visitors to this
site probably fall under two categories. You're probably either
scientifically-inclined with a curiosity about classical music, or
you're one of my friends who was a music major. I aim to write primarily
for the former group. I want to spread this love I have so that more
people can come to appreciate the beauty that I experience. But I ask
for assistance from the latter group. I may know more than the average
person, but I will leave out details or context or get things wrong from
time to time. I make no claim to be an expert (not even with physics,
ha!). I mean really, I've only very recently begun to be able to discern
the form of a piece I'm listening to. (I still suck at it, but it's
pretty exciting.) In my never-ending quest to learn more about classical
music, I ask that you enrich my posts with any knowledge, corrections,
opinions, or suggestions that you have. Even if you're saying that a
post is completely erroneous or naive, I will love you for it. You may
even gain something from the physical/scientific perspective I may take.
We'll see how it goes.  
  
As I've stated, my primary reason for starting this blog is to share my
passion with the uninitiated. I plan to do this by sharing stories,
articles, and videos with you. I may write about a piece that's stuck in
my head, concerts I've attended, or some factoid that I think is
entertaining. I already have a list of topics going. Requests will be
honored if I feel capable. Should I be allowed to post on other topics
that strike my fancy such as food, literature, or science? I haven't
decided. For now I think it's best to keep this blog to one topic.  
  
So let me start things off by sharing my background with classical
music. Through playing the violin in middle and high school, I came to
know much of the standard violin and symphonic repertoire. But I found
myself far outclassed by the time I reached college to continue playing.
So I lost my enthusiasm for, but was never too far removed from,
classical music. Then I attended a monumental (for me) concert during my
first year here in grad school. I had seen and met this particular
violinist in college when she was just starting to cause a stir in the
classical music community and was awestruck by her talents then. Seeing
the now-world-famous [Hilary Hahn](http://www.hilaryhahn.com/) perform
the Glazunov [violin
concerto](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C2mnr81jCWw) (and the Ernst
[transcription](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UWNCbpwC-PQ) of
Schubert's [Der Erlk√∂nig](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2OHJ0QwmzFs) as
her encore) ignited in me a new passion for this music that's persisted
since. Yes, I met her again after that concert, and yes, she's still my
favorite musician ever. But that story is worth a post of its own. At
this point I started listening and listening to my old favorite
symphonies and violin concertos, then to ones I didn't know and also to
piano concertos, cello concertos, lieder, chamber pieces, opera,
sonatas, character pieces, and so on. Eventually I took a freshman level
music history class which was wonderful for consolidating and organizing
the random tidbits that I knew. That was followed by a group
introductory piano class and, most recently, private lessons in piano. I
go to concerts when I can, especially if I'm traveling, and I started a
small group to watch operas on DVDs. To say I'm hooked is an
understatement.  
  
A [recent
segment](http://www.npr.org/blogs/deceptivecadence/2010/09/23/130076390/classical-fans-tell-stories-of-first-loves?ft=1&f=129702125)
on "All Things Considered" discussed listeners' 'first loves' in
classical music. I encourage you to follow the link. Some of the stories
are particularly moving. Specifically, though, they asked about pieces
of music. That disqualifies Hilary Hahn as my answer, so I'll give my
actual first. The earliest piece I can remember loving is Antonio
Vivaldi's "[The Four
Seasons](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0Rhvtm9LmXI)." I guarantee
you'll recognize it. My uncle had a videotape of some ensemble (which
one I never knew) performing it. I remember the short, fat, old solo
violinist's impeccable technique bewildering my young mind. That image
with the evocative and memorable melodies gave me a reason to practice
my technique. Eventually, I was able to hack my way through the suite,
which I did. Often. Much to my classmates' chagrin. I'm somewhat
thankful that no recordings exist of my playing back then. It would be
painful to hear today.  
  
So that's <span style="font-style: italic;">my</span> first love in
classical music. If you have one, what's <span
style="font-style: italic;">yours</span>? Do share. I would love to
hear. Please comment or message/email me about this post and others you
find interesting in the future. If I don't feel that I'm reaching anyone
or learning anything in the process, it will be hard for me to continue
this. I've enabled anonymous posting. As regards the title, well, it
makes sense if you know my given name. Thanks for reading. I hope we can
keep this up.

