Title: Preconceptions Part 1
Date: 2013-04-25 04:18
Author: Just Alfred
Tags: music
Slug: preconceptions-part-1

*Originally published at: [http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2013/04/preconceptions-part-1.html](http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2013/04/preconceptions-part-1.html)*

Tonight begins my first [Ring
cycle](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Der_Ring_des_Nibelungen) at the
opera house. I've seen the [Otto Schenk
production](http://youtu.be/9sgVjgraXsc?t=50s) on DVD, and the Live in
HD performances of the [Robert Lepage
production](http://youtu.be/sHa3NO219lc) in the theaters. I thought them
both fantastic productions. The former was much beloved by New York's
operavores. The latter has been
[universally](http://www.newyorker.com/online/blogs/culture/2012/05/the-met-ring-cycle-critics.html)
[panned](http://topics.nytimes.com/topics/reference/timestopics/people/l/robert_lepage/index.html).
It is that latter production that I will be seeing live.  
  
Criticisms mostly center around the set, dubbed "the machine". Robert
Lepage is responsible for the Cirque du Soleil show,
[KÃ ](http://youtu.be/xT9CXr2o5ME), in Las Vegas, and he brings his
high-tech artistry here. The machine is a dynamic backdrop consisting of
24 independently rotatable planks that can turn from a simple flat
screen to stair steps to the trees of the forest and more. The machine
has been called loud, distracting, alienating, shallow. My impressions
from the theaters were rather opposite. I found the use of the machine
highly creative and visually stunning. I thought it in keeping with
Wagner's ideal of the unified gesamtkunstwerk.  
  
But I am well aware that the experience at the hall can differ
significantly, so I won't yet criticize the critics. For now, my
opinions are as follows:  
  
The Otto Schenk production is about as traditional a staging as you'll
find. This is not a bad thing. Compare to productions out of
[LA](http://youtu.be/boa7zcaVOSo), [SF](http://youtu.be/PMhL011V7J4),
[Valencia](http://youtu.be/osoKrvetnpU), or the Mecca for ring-heads:
[Bayreuth](http://youtu.be/TJk4rb7za54) (pronounced bye-royt). There are
so many subtexts that one could project onto the Ring that many argue
the most enduring productions are the ones that do not confine the
interpretation in any way. A post-industrial American setting is novel,
but it restricts the message. By keeping the setting in an ambiguous
time and allowing the gods godliness, the opera is free to communicate
in whatever ways the viewer/listener is receptive. Schenk's sets and
costumes are stirring, the music and singing superb. I love this
production as well as anyone else.  
  
My viewing of the Gelb production seemed just as traditional. We are
still talking about gods and heroes. In some ways I gather that it is
even truer to the text. Some of Wagner's stage directions have been
ignored for technical reasons, but Gelb manages to adhere (sometimes to
ironic complaints of adding unnecessary details). The costumes and
singing are just as breathtaking. For my non-opera-going friends, the
Lepage production is the one I would introduce first.  
  
I am being intentionally vague since I'm trying to keep an open mind.
The rest of my impressions will have to come later. For now, my feelings
toward the new production are very positive. I will let you know in a
couple weeks whether the criticisms deserve merit or are merely
meretricious.

