Title: Remix
Date: 2011-09-17 01:50
Author: Just Alfred
Tags: The Classical-Kwontum Interface, Music

*Originally published at: [http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2011/09/None.html](http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2011/09/None.html)*

To my readers:  Apologies for the extended hiatus.  As it turns out,
finishing and defending a dissertation drains one's energy for
composition more than I anticipated.  After my momentum was lost, it was
hard to pick up the pencil, as it were, through travels, moves, job
searching and so on.  But I can only go so long without exercising my
creative muscle, and so I am back.  And today my topic is the remix.  
<a name="more"></a>  
Or is the term "covers"?  "Edits"?  "Reworks"?  I won't attempt to
differentiate.  What I am calling a remix is any piece of music that
draws heavily from an existing piece.  I think we are all familiar with
[these](http://youtu.be/_jOfH-Qa0Dc) in
[popular](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=X5JALwwaASg)
[music](http://ocremix.org/remix/OCR01182/).  Some of these can be
earnest tributes to the original music; others are just lazy thefts of
creativity.  But they are not symptoms of the decline in the industry of
modern man.  
  
The earliest example of which I am aware is the
[organum](http://youtu.be/mNMQu5LXaeI) of medieval music.  In this
style, the church took liturgical [Gregorian
plainchant](http://youtu.be/2HEKhr002Ts) and added a harmonic vocal
line.  This evolved into the [motet](http://youtu.be/FLD7FiHaTqE) where
vocal lines of different, often secular text were overlaid on, again,
Gregorian chant.  Since then, there has been a rich tradition of
composers writing [variations](http://youtu.be/hqoamga8744) on [admired
works](http://youtu.be/OK7I284Xf3k) of [other
composers](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pictures_at_an_Exhibition#Orchestral_arrangements).  
  
As in the linked examples of Mussorgsky, it can be quite interesting to
see what different arrangements can bring to a familiar melody.  Ravel's
orchestration has been criticized as too French, i.e. too soft and
mellifluous compared to the more discordant and percussive tone of the
original.  And yet the textural range accessible to an orchestra far
surpasses a single piano, so for many, Ravel's is the only version they
have heard.  
  
In my very first post, I mentioned Schubert's [Der
Erlkönig](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2OHJ0QwmzFs) and the
[transcription](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UWNCbpwC-PQ) by Heinrich
Wilhelm Ernst.  It is one of the most popular lieder, and for good
reason.  The original combines drama, narrative, poetry, and *word
painting* for a profoundly moving four minutes.  Compare the baritone's
performance to that of a [soprano](http://youtu.be/Iz5TV8LWbro).  Very
different performances, yes, but does the drama persist when sung by a
woman?  After all, three of the four characters are explicitly male.  
  
Now focus for a moment on the triplet ostinato on the right hand of the
accompaniment.  (Try emulating that on your desk to get a feel for how
difficult it is.)  This motive evokes the urgent galloping of the horse
on which the father is riding with the son.  Berlioz
[orchestrated](http://youtu.be/sTYqFzps0i4) the accompaniment, but is
this an improvement?  Maybe the percussive timbre of a piano better
evokes the horse's hoofs.  
  
Going the other way, listen now to Liszt's
[transcription](http://youtu.be/PFPSun30TBE) for solo piano and Ernst's
transcription for violin linked earlier.  Once your head stops spinning,
consider whether anything is lost by condensing the lied into the
limitations of one instrument.  Does the melodic line get too broken
because of the need to maintain the triplet motive?  Does the loss of
explicit words lose much of the drama, even if you know what words are
supposed to be there?  Perhaps for you the exhilaration of seeing such
virtuosity offsets the lost elegance from the original composition? 
([For the
brave....](http://imslp.org/wiki/Erlk%C3%B6nig,_D.328_%28Op.1%29_%28Schubert,_Franz%29))  
  
Even more fun is when a substantial [remix](http://youtu.be/MD6xMyuZls0)
of a [piece](http://youtu.be/ra-mRawdH3o) is itself substantially
[remixed](http://youtu.be/l6P54YocHLo).  
  
So the remix is nothing new in music.  They serve the same purposes and
are as contentious now as back then.  Some final thoughts to ponder: 
What are these purposes and who may benefit from them?  Are we prone to
favoring our first exposures to a piece?  Which version of 'Pictures'
did you first hear, and is it the one you prefer?  What are some of your
favorite remixes?  They needn't lean towards virtuosic.  Or towards
trance, for that matter.  Let's have a discussion!

