Title: SATB
Date: 2010-12-19 22:04
Author: Just Alfred
Tags: The Classical-Kwontum Interface, Music

*Originally published at: [http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2010/12/None.html](http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2010/12/None.html)*

That stands for *soprano*, *alto*, *tenor*, *bass*. That's just a
scoring for choral works common enough to get an abbreviation. You may
have noticed if there are choirs in your church that there are the high
and lowish female sections and highish and low male sections of the
choir.  SATB  
  
Well, that's easy enough. But I also wondered, what's a *baritone*?
Doesn't *treble* mean something? The three tenors don't sound that high.
I never heard them singing *falsetto*. (That's the higher register of
your voice associated with yodeling which, by the way, is really hard
whether you enjoy it or not.  Try it.) If you've wondered these things,
too, then read on.  
<a name="more"></a>  
When I took my music history class (instead of something useful, like
the physics of oxides) we were taught that female voices are classified
as [soprano](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FMPv8mADpA4),
[mezzo-soprano](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OV-ZfCWM3qo) (mezzo for
short), and [contralto](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0ddOhDxbWgU)
where soprano is the highest.  Male voices are classified as
[tenor](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RdTBml4oOZ8),
[baritone](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IO62fj__ehA), and
[bass](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JStPRk62QdI) where tenor is the
highest.  This was simple, and this made sense.  But then I recalled
[this video](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bmYRQWYlDbM) which I'd
encountered some time prior.  In case this sounds like screeching to
you, I direct your attention to Dessay's precise *intonation* even as
she makes the leaps across the *disjunct* melody (wide pitch *intervals*
between notes).  Also, notice her easy, wide, consistent *vibrato* (are
those wide enough to be trills sometimes?), her ease singing softly and
loudly, and the extra, little flourishes that she executes that just
amplify the difficulty of the song.  This, in my opinion, is an
excellent demonstration of *virtuosity*.  It's technically solid without
being ostentatious.  
  
How is this relevant?  Well, looking through the comments, I saw her
described as a *coloratura soprano*.  Eh?  So there are different kinds
of sopranos?  Well, it just so happens that beyond the six vocal ranges
I just mentioned, there are also classifications into voice types. 
According to the [wikipedia
article](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voice_type), sopranos can be
further classified into coloratura sopranos, lyric sopranos, dramatic
sopranos, soubrettes, and spintos.  The difference between these voice
types depends on such things as vocal color, agility, range of the
various registers, where the voice is most comfortable regardless of
overall range, etc.  But it gets a little worse.  Coloratura sopranos,
for instance, can be further classified as lyric or dramatic
coloraturas, or as sfogato sopranos.  Compare the differences
[here](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coloratura_soprano#Listen_and_Compare).  
  
This isn't just opera arcana akin to the amateur sommelier's spouting of
nonsense aromas he purports to detect in a Virginian chardonnay that he
thinks is French.  It's actually really important for these singers to
be classified correctly.  One mezzo [recently
learned](http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2010/11/15/DDJK1GBHJ9.DTL)
that she's actually a soprano, an experience that she compared to
undergoing a sex change.  Had she not discovered this sooner, there
would have been serious risks to her voice and career.  Maria Callas
[famously](http://www.npr.org/templates/story/story.php?storyId=123612228)
astounded critics early on by triumphantly filling roles written for the
coloratura soprano to the dramatic soprano and even into mezzo
territory, but soon wore out her voice.  You wouldn't ask a person built
as a line-backer to play as a quarterback (did I get that football
analogy right?) without expecting problems.  Likewise for singers.  You
can work to extend your range, and certainly many singers can fill roles
spanning a small range of classification.  But pushing boundaries too
far can be dangerous.  
  
But we haven't covered all of the ranges yet, have we?  Turns out treble
refers to prepubescent boys or girls with a soprano range.  What about
the male falsetto?  Some of you may recall the *castrati* popular in the
Baroque era.  Through a surgical manipulation prior to puberty, the
church maintained in these men child-sized vocal cords with
superman-sized rib-cages to back them up.  This produced ideal qualities
for "angelic" singing, but at a great cost.  Fortunately, the practice
is no longer condoned.  But who's to sing the many phenomenal parts
written for these poor men?  The closest modern equivalent is the
*counter-tenor*.  I just learned this a couple days ago.  It's basically
a guy who [sings well](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WX83BSR0mug) in
the falsetto register.  And, of course, there are subclassifications. 
Some of you might find the sound disorienting, interesting, beautiful,
or possibly even hot.  They don't have the huge voices and stamina of
castrati, but at least they have their manhood.  And this really isn't
very uncommon in popular music, is it?  Think of Prince, Matthew
Bellamy, Thom Yorke, and others.  
  
And yet, I have to wonder, by probability alone, shouldn't there be some
accidental castrato sitting around in India or China that we don't know
about?  Kids hurt themselves in weird ways all the time.  Wouldn't it be
interesting to hear?  I'm just saying.  
  
So there you have it.  Following the world's singers is as complicated
and interesting as following baseball players.  They all have their
roles, fortes, styles, career development, injuries, and so on.  It's as
exciting when a seasoned singer joins a new production as when a
seasoned player joins a team.  And it's as confounding to my mind trying
to keep track of it all.

