Title: The People's House
Date: 2011-10-19 17:39
Author: Just Alfred
Tags: music

*Originally published at: [http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2011/10/None.html](http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2011/10/None.html)*

Considering that one's social graph is not uniformly distributed among
the general population, but rather concentrated around a small number of
highly-connected nodes, I think it is fairly safe to say that 100% of my
readers fall in the lower 99%. 
[Recent](http://www.npr.org/blogs/deceptivecadence/2011/10/12/141272600/is-opera-stuff-only-rich-people-like)
[posts](http://www.npr.org/blogs/deceptivecadence/2011/10/13/141319827/opera-is-for-the-99-heres-what-you-told-us)
on NPR's Deceptive Cadence blog discuss the widespread perception of
opera as exclusive to the 1%, the super-rich.  And yet here you've come,
my commoners, to where I like to share my thoughts on that very topic. 
Responses to the posts ranged from accusations of opera being outdated
and out of touch to those blaming Hollywood for the false stereotypes. 
Many people pointed to their personally penurious positions and
penchants for opera as evidence against the stereotype.  I'll take the
argument a step further.  You will find few institutions more
egalitarian than the opera house.  
<a name="more"></a>  
Granted, at the major halls, there are seats that sell for several
hundred dollars each, and season subscriptions run easily into the
thousands.  I recall seeing back in 2010 that by donating about
$20,000, I think, to The Metropolitan Opera, one could reserve an early
spot in line to buy tickets to attend the new complete Ring Cycle in
2012.  Tickets for the cycle could themselves exceed $3,000.  
  
On the other hand, an upcoming rap concert (not exactly an elitist
pastime) in the area offers tickets in the range of $72-$272. 
Meanwhile, rush tickets at even the most esteemed opera houses are
typically $20 or less while regular seats are usually available in the
neighborhood of $30.  Seats under $100 are sometimes more readily
available than those above.  Smaller companies can offer rush or regular
tickets for as low as $5.  Now opera seems the more economical option.  
  
The cheap seats are not necessarily bad seats, either.  Seats on the
floor in front of the orchestra are some of the most expensive, but
suffer visual and auditory interference from obstacles between the seats
and the stage.  These patrons do, however, get to see and be seen, and
among the social elite, this is worth the premium.  Meanwhile, sitting
in the sloped balconies, you get a clear line of sight to the stage,
resulting in a purer experience.  The cheapest seats are normally in the
upper balconies.  This sets you farther from the stage, but in good
acoustic shape at most opera halls.  San Francisco occasionally even
employs "OperaVision" at select performances which hangs a projection
screen high enough to be unobtrusive that shows the stage action and
subtitles to further equalize the experience.  
  
The cheapest seats may cost less than one tenth of the price of the most
expensive, but certainly do not deliver one tenth the enjoyment.  
  
Furthermore, it is common for opera companies to engage with their
public through outdoor showings, public broadcasts, or other kinds of
outreach.  They bring culture to more than just their cities' elite.  
  
So here we have an organization in which the rich subsidize the
involvement of the rest of us, and no one is forcing them.  They do it
willingly and eagerly at a rate that their beloved free market
dictates.  It gets better.  Ticket receipts don't begin to cover the
costs of each performance, but further contributions from businesses and
wealthy individuals fill the gap.  There are no cries of class warfare,
no calls for the impoverished to pay their "fair" share.  With this art,
everyone wins.  
  
Almost.  Unfortunately and ironically, many of the performers who bring
us this art suffer the most loss.  Professional opera singers have
trained for no less than eight to ten years, invested hundreds of
thousands of dollars, face intense competition, are at the mercy of
their physical health, and most are even fluent in Italian, French,
and/or German on top of their native English.  Opera performances are
scheduled a few days apart to preserve the singers' voices.  If a
baseball pitcher tears a ligament, surgery will fix that in time.  If a
singer overexerts and damages her voice, the options are far more
limited.  And for all this risk, work, and sacrifice, compensation
remains paltry to the point that some cannot afford to attend their own
performances (if that were physically possible).  
  
So the next time you go to the opera with your $20 rush ticket,
remember that some super rich suckers paid for their crummy $300 seats
so that you can witness a miracle of human achievement and cooperation
unfold before you at a cost that's a fraction of the value you get from
it.  No bouncer at the door sends you away for wearing a shirt of the
wrong color.  No talentless actor is making millions for standing coolly
in front of explosions on a screen.  No one gets into brawls because of
the winners or losers because no one wins or loses.  You can appreciate
that the opera house is a house of the people.  And for just an evening,
life feels fair.

