Title: Virtuosity
Date: 2011-02-12 22:11
Author: Just Alfred
Tags: The Classical-Kwontum Interface, Music

*Originally published at: [http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2011/02/None.html](http://kwontum.blogspot.com/2011/02/None.html)*

A belated post....  
  
Today, I will explore the notion of virtuosity and what it means to me. 
Let's start with the Oxford Dictionary Online's
([ODO](http://oxforddictionaries.com/?attempted=true)) definition of a
virtuoso: "a person highly skilled in music or another artistic
pursuit."  Seems simple enough, but when talking about new words or
ideas, I find it instructive to consider the edges.  No one would argue
against applying the appellation to [Yehudi
Menuhin](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=k8K53QCdS20), [Arthur
Rubinstein](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Dxzpy1b1_BY), or [Jacqueline
du Pré<span style="font-family: inherit; font-size: small;"><span
class="Apple-style-span"
style="border-collapse: separate; color: black; font-style: normal; font-variant: normal; font-weight: normal; letter-spacing: normal; line-height: normal; text-indent: 0px; white-space: normal;"><span
class="Apple-style-span"
style="line-height: 15px;"></span></span></span>](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L5C99JyP2ns),
so heaping more praise on them does little to clarify anything.  But
what about soloists less celebrated?  Do they deserve the designation? 
Is skill all that matters or does depth of expression make a
difference?  What about dancers, authors, or painters?  Why are we more
likely to proclaim a poet a genius than a virtuoso?  
<a name="more"></a>  
What is the difference between a genius and a virtuoso, anyway?  ODO
says a genius is "a person who is exceptionally intelligent or creative,
either generally or in some particular respect."  In common usage, we do
usually associate geniuses with exceptional intellect (e.g. Hawking,
Wittgenstein, Ken Jennings), creativity (e.g. Shakespeare, Mozart,
Kandinsky), or both (e.g. da Vinci,
[Nabokov](http://www.nytimes.com/2011/02/01/science/01butterfly.html),
Edison).  Virtuosi are associated with exceptional skill in performance,
especially live performance.  Sometimes they display genius in this
regard (e.g. Hilary Hahn's thoughtful interpretation of the fiendish
Schoenberg Violin Concerto), sometimes not (e.g. Lang Lang's
over-dramatic interpretations of, well, everything).  
  
So that's a start towards our target.  Although the poet is highly
skilled in an artistic pursuit, it is his creativity that we cherish,
and so he is dubbed a genius.  Likewise with a composer of music.  But
the prima ballerina or the marimbist (as in my last post) is cherished
for her skill in execution.  There is creativity involved, to be sure. 
But I can come up with a creative interpretation of the Moonlight
sonata.  That does not mean it will be skillfully-executed unless maybe
I record a dozen takes and splice together the best moments.  In front
of an audience, there is only one chance to get it right.  It is the
singular nature of this experience and the acknowledgment of the
requisite talent and dedication that compels us to bestow upon our
virtuosi a title greater than "performer".  
  
But how good do you have to be?  Do we call every solo musician who
tours internationally a virtuoso?  What about those musicians who play
full-time with orchestras?  There is a different emphasis in their
performance, but it is still performance.  Unfortunately, I think this
is where arguments are unavoidable.  I, personally, think the world's
major orchestras boast some of our greatest virtuosi, and some do manage
to do some solo touring.  If you consider that the solo bassoon or
French horn repertoire is only so large, effectively precluding a
full-time solo career for many instruments, then one understands why
this is so.  But the question changes for violinists or cellists.  Where
do the sets of virtuosi, solo violinists, and orchestra violinists
intersect?  This boundary to the definition, I am afraid, must remain a
subjective matter.  
  
What about popular musicians, like [John
Petrucci](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-5VwPfyEq3w) of Dream Theater,
Mariah Carey, or [this
drummer](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ItZyaOlrb7E)?  Martial
<u>artists</u> like [Bruce
Lee](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=18t7H7i7VIw), [Jet
Li](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1igTGE1_kTs), or [this
guy](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QfA0TzmYRww)?  Or sports greats
like, well, ok, I don't know sports.  Take your pick.  They are all
celebrated for the skill which they demonstrate in live, unedited
performance.  The musicians certainly ought to be eligible though it
simply isn't customary to call them virtuosi.  Yet it doesn't seem right
to call Michael Jordan a basketball virtuoso.  True, sports are not
typically considered an artistic endeavor.  But what difference is there
between watching a tennis match and a judo match?  Not a whole lot.  But
there is a big difference between watching a judo match and a wushu
form, like in the linked young Jet Li video.  Insofar as the
demonstration of a martial art or other athletic activity is an
expression of the practitioner, I think the term, virtuoso, can be
applied.  If it is simply one athlete reacting to the actions of the
other athlete(s), I think there is no art.  But perhaps this gets into
an argument over the nature of art.  
  
So these are my opinions.  To summarize, the virtuoso is one who
demonstrates considerable skill (not necessarily depth or sensitivity)
in live performance of an artistic (i.e. expressive) nature.  I am sure
there will be those who disagree with me, and I would love to hear your
arguments.  Please, indulge me.  I leave you with two last thoughts.  Is
it fair for our criteria to be different for performers from different
times or backgrounds?  When do we stop calling a child a prodigy and
start calling her a virtuoso?

